# Analyzing Fictional Employee Data

Note: This data was generated by IBM and is not reflective of any real organization.

This dataset is about attrition, which is the rate at which employees are leaving a company. Our goal is to identify why employees are no longer with this company.
The dataset has numerous variables for each of 1470 employees, including demographics of age, gender, marital status, and educational attainment, as well as job-related information like whether they travel for business, their distance from the office, compensation and income, and history with the company. 

First, we will examine the overall attrition rate in the below waffle chart.

We observe that 16 out of every 100 employees have left. Companies should generally aim for an [attrition rate of 10% or lower](https://insightglobal.com/blog/employee-attrition-rate-how-to-calculate-improve/). Now, let's think about some reasons employees might be leaving. 
The data also includes the results of what appears to be a satisfaction survey, with values of 1-4 (1 being the worst, and 5 being the best) for each employee's environmental satisfaction, perception of work-life balance, job satisfaction, and job involvement. The distributions of these survey results and attrition rate are visualized in the animation below.

It appears that lower scores generally tend to have higher attrition rates, which is what we would expect since most people would prefer to not hate their workplace. Let's now delve into some potential reasons for those scores. During the return to office following the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been numerous [articles discussing the "future of work"](https://doi-org.ezproxy.rice.edu/10.1080/13678868.2022.2047380) that articulate employees preference for at least a hybrid option, due to better work life balance without the commute. With this in mind, let's examine the relationship between work life balance rating and commute distance. 

We can see that employees who left were more likely to have longer commutes. 

Now let's look at the overall distribution of commute distances, to get a sense of how far most employees live from work.

We see most people live within xx miles of the office. Let's see if this differs by age, and if that affects the attrition rate.

This survival analysis graph suggests that most people who are leaving are younger (under xx age). This makes sense because younger people are earlier in their careers, so they have fewer attachments or loyalty to the company, particularly with Millennials and Generation Z. 
Additionally, the national [average age at a person's first marriage](https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/visualizations/time-series/demo/families-and-households/ms-2.pdf) has been increasing for over 20 years and is now around 29 years of age. This means the majority of young people are single, so they also have fewer commitments both to their community and at-home responsibilities, which makes it easier for young people to move to find better opportunities. 

So far, we know employees that tend to leave at higher rates are younger and have long commutes. Could there be something deeper motivating this company's attrition problem? Let's see if there are any trends of attrition by department.

The whisker plot above demonstrates that although Sales has a slightly higher attrition rate, Human Resources has a much wider range. This is particularly an issue when there are so few members of HR at this company in the first place, as HR plays an essential role in avoiding and managing employee turnover - if they don't want to stay, who else will?

To wrap up, I will offer a few recommendations to help this company reduce their attrition rate, correlated with the key findings above:
- Improve employee satisfaction by offering a hybrid working environment, and help make the commute more managable by [providing transportation](https://www.sciencetimes.com/articles/38186/20220613/inside-googles-bus-fleet-a-tour-of-the-companys-transportation-options.htm#:~:text=These%20shuttle%20buses%20are%20equipped,cities%20the%20shuttle%20travels%20through.) or vouchers for ridesharing. This will also allow employees to get work done on the road
- Design initiatives to improve retention of younger employees, like giving recognition and expanding career opportunities, improve feedback mechanisms, and allow them to see their ideas being implemented
- Create consistency within the HR department and build more robust onboarding and training as well as events to build company culture

In the future, it would be interesting to analyze a similar dataset which includes more demographic information, like racial/ethnic data or more diverse gender identities, as these are particularly pressing in the current cultural moment. 
